---
title: Passion projects
---

Throughout my career, I've always had at least one project on the go outside
work - call this a personal, learning, or passion project - it all amounts to
the same.

I've got a lot of benefit out of these projects - sometimes, I approach them
deliberately to try out a new technique or tool. Sometimes, I just enjoy the
process of starting a new app from scratch. Sometimes, I've got an idea to
satisfy a problem I, or someone I know, is facing.

This post is mostly dwelling on how often I see these sorts of projects being
undervalued - the point of these projects, in my mind, is that they don't have
to succeed. They don't even need to make sense, but they also need to have a bit
more thought and structure than a single-file code snippet or codepen. What they
provide is a kind of sandbox - both from the point of view of providing a space
to play around, but also from a stakes point of view - there's no client getting
invoiced here, there's no startup running out of cash unless this project turns
it around, or a board of directors to be presented to to secure ongoing funding.
That's a really fun and relaxing environment to work in.

This doesn't mean that development or effort isn't fast paced, but it doesn't
_have_ to be. I've personally noticed a real difference in how I approach
projects, when I have space to think. This means that if I face a problem, or
something doesn't work the way I expect - there's no pressure. I can put that
problem down for a little while, even a few days or weeks. I can come back to it
from time to time, and try something out, see if it works or not. If something
really doesn't work out the way I want it to, I can walk away completely, or I
can spend a couple of hours tidying it up enough to go on my
[Github](https://github.com/joshmcarthur), MIT license it, and leave it there,
in case it's useful to someone else. There's no obigation to support it, keep it
alive, or up to date.

This lack of urgency also helps pacing in other ways. I've found the working
patterns for my passion projects tend to be really different when you already
have professional and personal commitments. For me, this means that my ratio of
planning to doing is very weighted towards planning - I'm spending less time
actually at my desk, but much more time _not_ at my desk thinking about the next
move. I've found that this pattern of work has really helped me in my
professional softwave development job as well, since it's taught me the value of
picking the right approach the first time, and how the right decision can
continue to pay dividends throughout the life of a project. Sometimes spending
90% of the time thinking through the best approach means that the 10% of
actually executing on that approach is more productive as if I'd spend 100% of
the time fumbling for a working solution.

I've got a number of 'completed' projects that I personally use most days. I
find the end state for these projects which are largely feature-complete (or at
least feature complete for my needs) really interesting, because it turns out
that the process of taking care of these projects is also really different from
professional work. From my point of view, professional long term support tends
to be focussed on security  - patching packages, and upgrading frameworks,
libraries and languages as they reach end of life. Personal projects _can_ have
this pressure, but it depends on priorities. I see these types of projects being
more like taking care of a garden - sure, there will be a degree of chores, like
mowing the lawn or weeding, but there will also be a degree of small,
incremental tidy ups - pruning, and tidying up loose ends or rough patches
you've noticed and now can't unsee. Every now and then, there will even be a
larger piece of work - maybe redoing part of the garden by creating a new
feature or undertaking a refactor of some core code.

Regardless, I"ve got a lot of value out of creating projects with no particular
end goal in mind. It's a completely different working situation than
professional work, and the lack of structure provides a great deal of space to
explore technical, architectural, planning and project management skill
development.

To check out passion projects I've done before, check out my [repository
history](https://github.com/joshmcarthur?tab=repositories) on Github.