---
layout: post
title: "Taranaki Labour Weekend Trip Report"
description: "Trip report about a week-long trip around Taranaki/Egmont National Park, Labour Weekend 2019"
category: trip-reports
tags: [trip-reports,tramping]
---

We recently made the most of the long weekend (Labour Weekend in NZ) to head up to Taranaki. We had
originally planned to do the [Round the Mountain
circuit](https://www.doc.govt.nz/parks-and-recreation/places-to-go/taranaki/places/egmont-national-park/things-to-do/tracks/around-the-mountain-circuit/),
but after checking out the long stretches between Lake Dive and Hollly Hut, and with a
average-weather forecast, we decided to avoid the Western side of the park and focus on 1-2 night
circuits from the Dawson Falls, North Egmont and East Egmont park entrances.

There's not a tonne of information that we could find planning this trip aside from the official DoC
brochure materials, so we wanted to make a contribution by describing our trip. 

## Dawson Falls Visitor Centre to Waingongoro Hut

We took around 4 hours to drive from Wellington to Dawson Falls with stops in Levin at the Allied
Fuel and Whanganui. Waingongoro Hut is close to the road end - 1.5 hours DoC time, so we chose this
one for our first day to be able to make a prompt start.

There's a number of ways to get to this Hut. It can be reached from Dawson Falls via the Ridge track
or Wilkies Pools tracks, or from Stratford Plateau past the radio masts and through the Enchanted
Track. We headed up the Wilkies Pools track as far as the hydro station inlet, joined the Ridge Loop
track, and then headed down the Waingongoro track past the swingbridge (the highest one in the national park!), to the Hut.

Waingongoro Hut is officially 16 bunks, but with platform bunks could fit more. Being close to the
road end, it gets variable visitors - in summer, it's easy to reach for families, but we stayed for
2 nights (our second day had heavy rain forecast so we decided to stay put), and didn't see a single
person. Lovely. While it looks like there's plenty of camping in front of the hut in the DoC photos
on the [hut
page](https://www.doc.govt.nz/parks-and-recreation/places-to-go/taranaki/places/egmont-national-park/things-to-do/huts/waingongoro-hut/),
this is actually the helipad and has now been cleared and fenced off. In a bit of weird twist, the
hut looks up past the Stratford Plateau towards the ski field on Taranaki, with a cell tower clearly
visible on the ridgeline at Jacksons Lookout. On the up side, there's good reception here!

We returned the long way, up to the swingbridge, across and along the Enchanted Track towards
Stratford Mountain House, but turning off after a kilometer or so to head up the ridgeline track to
Stratford Plateau, then down the Ridge Track to the top of the Wilkies Pools track, before returning
along the track to the visitor centre.

## Dawson Falls Visitor Centre to Lake Dive Hut via Lower Lake Dive track

We were keen to do this one so we could try out the Upper track back in the snow. The staff at the
visitor centre gave us a heads up that the lower track was a little rough and overgrown, but
fortunately for us a ranger had been through at the start of October and made it all the way along
the lower track with a weedeater to the Hut, clearing the track boundaries, which was appreciated.

The track is a bit up and down, at most points either descending into, or ascending out of, a gully
or river valley. The gullies before Hasties Hill and shortly before the Hut are the worst, but are
not difficult, with steps and ladders covering the steeper bits. There is a track to the top of
Hasties Hill marked on the topomap that appears to have been abandoned and is unmaintained. The
track turnoff is still discernible, but the track is blocked off and is no longer signposted or
marked. 

As a bit of a milestone, a branch of the Kaupokonui Stream is crossed after Hasties Hill that
appears to be fed by a mineral spring, with a noticeable sulfurous smell and the distinctive orange algae
growth in the stream.

The last kilometer to the Hut is pretty flat and is a nice end to the day, with the hut visible
across a small dip before it is reached. 

Lake Dive Hut is nicely positioned in a sheltered tip beside the larger of the Beehives, just above
Lake Dive itself, with a view up towards Fanthams Peak. It's a Lockwood design that is at least the
same pattern as Pouakai Hut, and possibly other huts in the park since many of them were built
around the same time in the 80s. The Hut layout is slightly unusual, with the rangers quarters at
the front of the Hut, a bunkroom on the left that can only be accessed from the hut deck, and a
kitchen/common area that wraps 90 degrees around the rangers quarters, with an additional bunkroom
at the back left corner. 

Lake Dive Hut is 16 bunks, but again, is platform bunks allowing for a few more if necessary. The
fireplace is the cast-iron model typical to DoC huts and works well and throws out heaps of heat.
The hut even has a shower cubicle that can be found on the downhill side of the firewood shed - a
plastic container with a spout is provided to fill up with hot water. We shared this hut with Gabby
and Jacob, a couple from Poland doing the circuit around the mountain. 

## Lake Dive Hut to Dawson Falls Visitor Centre via Upper Lake Dive track

## North Egmont Visitor Centre to Maketawa Hut via Maketawa Track

## Maketawa Hut via Maketawa Track/Tahurangi Transmission Tower access road

## Mangorei Road to Holly Hut via Pouakai Hut

## Holly Hut to Mangorei Road via Pouakai Hut

## Dawson Falls Visitor Centre to Waingongoro Hut 
